calorie deficits oh my god
could we possibly have the words calorie
deficit
thrown in our faces more
probably not so welcome back to my
channel you guys
today we are going to be talking about
calorie deficits
what they are why you see them
everywhere
if they really work and what i recommend
petite women do so let's get ready to
just
dive into this so what is a calorie
deficit a calorie deficit is
simply a shortage of calories caused by
eating
less and burning more through exercise
now if you have been struggling to lose
weight or lose fat
by dieting eating less and doing more
exercise
then you know it's really not as simple
as just being in a calorie deficit
right if you're one of those people
who's been on an eternal struggle
to lose fat you've tried all the things
you've dieted
you've done the running the cardio then
you simply know
that the calorie deficit doesn't always
work and we're going to be talking about
why it doesn't always work for petite
women why
it's failing you what's really happening
when it fails you
and then i'm going to give you three
ways to tweak it and
fix it so that you actually can get
results as a petite
start losing fat and tone up people ask
me all the time on instagram
do i really need to be in a calorie
deficit to lose weight the answer is
yes you do need to be in a negative
calorie balance in order to lose weight
however when you lose weight you are not
just losing fat
in fact there's this one study i'm gonna
bring up i'm just gonna pull up this
chart so i can look at it
this was a stanford university research
uh study on
active men they were put in a 40 calorie
deficit
and they tracked their weight their lean
muscle mass and their body fat for three
weeks
and what they found was that while these
men lost an average
of 8.4 pounds in 21 days
over half of the weight loss was
actually
lean muscle mass let's talk about what
this means
so yes the scale went down but it was
largely
muscle they lost not fat and that is
very significant because what happens
when you lose muscle
is that your metabolism decreases and
that's because
it is very energy spendy to have muscles
so of course if you're gonna be in a
deficit your body's gonna try to let go
of the stuff that requires the most
energy to hold on to aka muscle not
fat so in this study there was a
negative effect on metabolism because
they lost so much muscle mass
and they found that it dropped as much
as 230 calories or metabolism so
it doesn't sound like a lot right but
over the course of three months
they lost the ability the capacity to
burn
an additional five to six pounds of fat
at rest
so if they had kept that muscle they
could have burned
way more fat doing absolutely nothing
the problem is
they lost that muscle when they dieted
and they lost that capacity
to be able to burn up fat this is also
what's known as
metabolic adaptation a slower metabolism
means you burn fewer calories at rest
which means you're more efficient
and that also means that you don't need
as many calories anymore to exist
and so you plateau right you're not
going to lose any more weight because
you've
effectively lowered your needs your
caloric needs your body adjusts to that
and this is where it really sucks for
petite women petite women my girls
if you go down this route of deciding to
lose weight by doing a steep or even a
moderate calorie deficit
and you're already cutting from 1200
calories down to a thousand calories or
1400 calories down to a thousand
calories
you are going to lose muscle mass which
is the one thing you need to be able to
keep weight off in the long term
and when you lose muscle mass you're not
going to get the results that you want
in terms of
looking toned and strong feeling good
you're going to be still holding fat
even as you drop weight
and lastly you will effectively slow
your metabolism down to the point where
you now have to
eat or i should say you can only eat a
thousand calories in a day
without gaining weight so you start
putting yourself in that hole
putting yourself in a position where the
only way out
is to actually gain weight or do a
really slow reverse diet
to get out of what you just did to your
metabolism
so you can see that one of the major
major major downsides to a calorie
deficit
for men and women but this is
particularly important for petite women
because of how low our calorie threshold
already is
you can see that when you lose muscle it
doesn't get you closer to your goal
so that actually brought me already into
point number two i had which was when
you do
get that low in calories that's petite
and then you hit that plateau that
metabolic adaptation
you are now stuck like i said at a
thousand calories i won't repeat myself
but
you guys a lot of you guys have been
there before because i've talked with
you about it
it's when you've dieted for so long or
you've yo-yo dieted that you now
only eat a little bit of food in a day
but you still feel like
even just looking at food makes you gain
weight and it's because
you've slowed down your metabolism
you've maybe lost a little bit of muscle
from dieting too much and now you're in
a place where your metabolism is lower
if this is you by the way it's not
permanent your metabolism is
dynamic it can adapt it can speed up
again so don't worry you didn't
permanently do anything here
you can absolutely start increasing your
calories slowly and strength training to
try to get that muscle back
up and the more lean muscle mass you
have the more calories you'll be able to
burn at rest
the more fat you'll be able to rest the
more calories you'll be able to eat in a
day without gaining weight
and that is so so so key and the third
reason why
calorie deficits fail us fatigue is when
we drop
low when we drop calories low we do that
calorie deficit from an already low
threshold right petite women are
starting dieting from lower number of
calories because we're smaller we just
tend to eat less we don't need as many
calories to sustain us and keep us alive
right so
like you know the men in this study were
probably eating two thousand
twenty five hundred three thousand
calories a day they can cut off 200
calories and it will not feel
different like gary my fiance he's six
four he eats
six thousand calories a day all he has
to do is cut out a couple cookies here
and there
he's fine there's no repercussions for
that
in terms of losing muscle mass or you
know low energy and mood or hunger or
anything because he already has enough
calories left over
even in a deficit to feel good when we
cut calories as petite women
we don't have all of that extra room to
cut from
we're cutting from an already smaller
reservoir if you will of calories
because we're smaller and that's okay
but as a result when we do try to take
away and we end up with a thousand
calories a day
we are not going to be feeling good
we're gonna lose muscle we're going to
have low energy we're gonna have all
those things that i talked about so
it doesn't scale down well does it work
yes you will lose weight
would you like to lose weight at the
expense of
your general well-being your long-term
health
your ability to lose that weight and
keep it off in the long term though
my guess is no you would not want that
so that third way that calorie deficits
is failing us as petite women is the
side effects
of dieting on petite women are more
pronounced
than they are on women or men that are
taller who can afford to eat more
calories
and therefore when they do a calorie
deficit they still have a lot of
calories left over
and we don't talk about how you can fix
this and get this working in your favor
so here are my three tweaks for turning
this around
step number one is to stop focusing on
eating less
and start focusing on eating better
now when you start focusing on eating
more whole foods
less processed foods not only are they
more satiating
because of the nutrients that are in
them but they're also usually more
voluminous meaning
vegetables take up a lot of space in
your stomach the
fiber that's in high fiber carbohydrates
is going to keep you fuller longer
healthy fats are going to keep you full
because of the slows digesting and
protein is also hard to digest
and break down so that's going to keep
you very satiated
and full as well and when you blend all
three protein fats and fiber scrubs in
one meal you get that trifecta
and you end up really shutting down your
cravings and
not getting hungry and you can stay full
for hours
after if you balance your meal properly
so sometimes it's not about how much
you're eating it's about what you're
eating
of course the laws of thermodynamics
still apply if you eat in a surplus
you will likely gain weight given it's
not offset by exercise
however let's just take a look at what
two 1500 calorie diets could look like
if one was
more wholesome more whole foods based
and one was more processed now i'm not
telling you to eat 1500 calories i'm
just giving you an example
so on the one hand if you ate mostly
processed foods in a day
you could rack up 1500 calories very
quickly i'm talking like one or two
meals and
you're done right you're not gonna feel
full eating a cookie
from subway and like you know um
whatever something from a fast food
restaurant or even just
uh you know something that is is
very processed if it's a protein bar if
it's if it's
pre-packaged these types of foods are
not satiating
at all so yes you could technically just
have that
you know one meal a day but that would
be all you would eat and that would be
miserable you would have the worst day
ever i'm not sure you could even stick
to that and i'm not sure why you would
but easily 1500 calories can rack up
really fast when it's
processed foods however if you look at
like a 1500
calorie day that i eat it is full of
food
and sometimes i eat more than that
sometimes i eat around that it depends
but
as an example just to compare i have six
meals a day and they're all
full i fill my plate so in the morning
you could be able to have
eggs and two slices of toast and uh
cheese
and you know a side salad you could have
a soup
for lunch i have a turkey soup with you
know cheese and it's it's so
filling and for my snack i have a yogurt
bowl with granola and berries high fiber
it's great and dinner i'll have a mac
and cheese a protein and vegetable mac
and cheese that i made in my instant pot
it's
fantastic and i always have dessert
lately i've been having a protein ice
cream bowl
with chocolate cacao nibs and pumpkin
seeds and
can you guys see just imagining that
even just how long it took for me to say
it
they're both the same amount of calories
but one of them is going to make you
feel
good keep you full keep you satiated
and give you what you need to
successfully
you know stay within your calorie range
whereas the other one is going to set
you up for failure because it is
it is just impossible to eat that low
that first of all the volume of food is
so low and second of all
the lack of nutrients in that food will
make you hungry
and this is not to say that you should
never eat processed foods i don't want
you guys to make that
i eat probably 20 uh processed foods
each day and i just call them fun foods
you know i don't feel bad about them
they are just a part of life and i try
to to fit them in because if i were to
restrict them entirely i would binge eat
so i have chocolate every day i do have
cookies that's my current weakness it
was creme brulee last year it's cookies
this year
so you don't need to swear off
sugar or processed foods but you just
want to be
aware of how much of the food you're
eating is actually whole and nutrient
dense
because that's the food that is going to
help you achieve your goals
so that you don't actually have to take
calories away another thing is that when
you do start eating more whole foods you
might likely be eating in a deficit
a slight deficit because the food has
less calories in general
unprocessed food has less calories in
general than processed foods typically
there's no hidden fats or hidden sugars
because you're making it on your own
and you won't even notice though because
you'll feel so satiated and full by the
nutrient-dense
nature of that food so that's another
reason why some petite women will lose
weight when they switch to a whole foods
diet
it's not just magic the law of
thermodynamics does apply
but they might be eating slightly less
calories but still feeling stuffed and
really stationed in full
it's just that they're making better
choices instead of just eating less in
general
the second way to fix this is to start
prioritizing
protein in every meal and eat in a
protein forward
manner in general have about 25 to 35
grams of protein per meal
that's so solid and when you go out to
order at restaurants or you make food
for yourself
look for the protein the higher protein
recipes and
just if you eat in that way protein is
gonna help you stay satiated it's gonna
help you stay full and
most importantly it's going to help you
build that lean muscle which if you guys
haven't heard me say it enough
is the key for petite women to stay lean
year round without dieting the third fix
here is to start lifting weights and
just be patient
the only way to build muscle is to
lift weights now you can use your body
weight as a form of resistance you're
gonna adjust that within one to two
months
after that you need to start picking up
something a little heavier something has
a little bit more stimulus on the
muscles
and allow yourself to progressively
increase those weights over time so you
can continue to build muscle
lifting weights is awesome for petite
women it's going to help increase your
confidence it's going to
increase your metabolism it's going to
help you build that muscle
which is going to all help you increase
your metabolism at rest which helps you
burn more fat in your sleep
third thing here also and this is within
this realm is to just be patient
with a calorie deficit you're dropping
fat and muscle at the same time and it's
all happening really fast and you're
ending up in a hole
with a body recomposition and with a
slower approach it's going to take more
time
but you're going to end up in an amazing
place here's what you can expect if you
follow
this route six months from now and i
would say bodybecome starts at around
eight weeks and can
take up to a year depending on how much
you've been dieting in the past and what
your starting body composition is
but in six months imagine that you are
strong in your body confident you've
dropped fat
your body fat percentage is lower you
feel really good about your food choices
you're sleeping better you never have
sugar cravings
you don't feel guilty about food these
are the types of things you can expect
once you
kind of start leaning into cooking more
and lifting and building that muscle
so that you're not always worrying about
exercising your food off or
eating less in general so those are the
three ways that i would recommend fixing
it
and there's just a sidebar i want to
make here it's not just eating less that
will put you in a calorie deficit it's
also over exercising or exercising more
that can put you in a calorie deficit
without changing the number of calories
you're eating
i just want to side note that this in my
experience
coaching hundreds if not thousands of
petite women through binary comps
when you use exercise as a form of
entering a calorie deficit it can have
really negative connotations
and implications on your mindset because
it's very easy to get into
the idea that you can eat whatever you
want and then just go exercise
it off and i've actually gone down this
road myself i'll start
you know you'll start like running more
doing more cardio
because you ate something and you your
mind just gets fixated on that
this is not only completely ineffective
it does not work
but it also sucks mentally if you've
been through this let me know in the
comments it's so
so horrible it's it's hard to get out of
too the reason why it doesn't work is
because when you're
exercising you are grossly
overestimating the number of calories
that you're burning
in that workout session especially as
petites i'm lucky if i burn 200 calories
in a 30 minute cardio session okay like
that's me
busting my butt it's hard to burn
calories when we're this efficient this
small
the second thing when you're couple
these together it's kind of it sucks but
the second thing is that you're grossly
underestimating the number of calories
that are in the food you're eating so
what ends up happening is
you're eating food and then exercising
it off
thinking that you did exercise it off
when in reality it would require you to
be running all day to really make up for
that
so you can see how this logic absolutely
leads to
horrible places that will not help you
and so that's also why i don't recommend
that you enter a calorie deficit by
increasing your cardio there's a lot of
other reasons i don't recommend this it
increases your appetite
it's going to make you hungrier so
you're going to be hungry anyways
and then of course running this and
cardio is catabolic so if
only thing you do is run you're just
further encouraging
the breakdown of muscle tissue which we
want to preserve
so there's a lot of reasons why just
increasing your expenditure
is usually helpful but you don't want to
overdo it so
sometimes maybe just increasing your
step count or your um
non-exercise uh not your non-structured
exercise activity
that can be really useful for kind of
getting a leg up on your goals
but going and doing extra cardio classes
and just getting your cortisol levels
jacked up is not going to help but it's
all of these things
as a together balance in a sustainable
way that will help you get your goal
by the way this entire process that i've
just outlined to is what i teach petite
women to do
we've helped hundreds of women go
through this process and come out the
other side
and we are taking a new session of women
in february so in the next
actually this week to join our february
session of the petite power program
if you're interested in applying you can
book a call with me below
it's a free call we're gonna chat for 25
minutes about your goals
what you'd like to achieve and if we
both feel like it's a good fit we'll
accept you into the program and then we
will
get you started we're starting at the
end of february so if you're interested
at all in going through this process
yourself
but you want someone to help you you
want someone who knows your body type as
a fatigue and you want to be surrounded
by
petite experts in the health space this
is the only program that can do that for
you there's no other programs for petite
women
and we would absolutely love to work
with you so you can apply
to book a call with me below and i'll
get back to you shortly
and other than that you guys i would
love to hear if this resonates with you
i also want to know what
questions you have about calorie
deficits for petite women below
and your experiences with this because
i'm sure we've
all had some experience with this before
let me know what you think and questions
in the comments i will answer them
and other than that i hope you guys have
an amazing rest of your day and i will
see you next week
[Music]
you